JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
Trump administration
takes on the government of
Syria, ordering
airstrikes in retaliation for
chemical weapons
attacks.
We look at the decision and what
could come
next.
Then:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
We have made tremendous progress
in our relationship
with China.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
touts deepening
relations with China after his
first summit
with the leader of the world's
other economic
powerhouse.
Then: With Passover just around
the corner,
we join celebrated chef Joan
Nathan in her
kitchen to talk about her new
cookbook exploring
Jewish food from around the
world.
JOAN NATHAN, Chef: You can't mix
milk and
meat, you can't eat certain
shellfish, so
that what happens is, Jewish
people think
about their food a lot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
take on this
week's news, including what a
rule change
in the Senate means for the
ability of the
two parties to work together.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White House
says President
Trump has sent a strong signal
to the world
with last night's cruise missile
strike on
Syria.
The attack drew widespread
support today from
American allies, and
condemnation from the
Syrians and their allies.
A flash of light and the roar of
jet engines
lit up the predawn in the
eastern Mediterranean.
Two U.S. Navy destroyers fired
off 59 Tomahawk
cruise missiles.
Amateur video broadcast on
Syrian state TV
appeared to show the missiles
striking home,
the target, the Syrian
military's Shayrat
air base.
U.S. officials say it was the
launching pad
for a chemical attack that
killed more than
80 people in Idlib province.
Saleh Hawa, an opposition
activist in Idlib,
spoke to us via Skype.
SALEH HAWA, Syrian Opposition
Activist: There
is a kind of comfort among
people that, at
the end, after -- maybe after
seven years
of suffering and pain, at the
end, we have
got a kind of ally.
We have got a kind of protector,
you can say.
JUDY WOODRUFF: News of the U.S.
missile strike
broke as President Trump was
meeting last
night at his resort in Florida
with the president
of China.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
It is in this vital national
security interest
of the United States to prevent
and deter
the spread and use of deadly
chemical weapons.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Both Russia and
Syria claim
rebel groups were responsible
for Tuesday's
chemical attack, and the
Russians quickly
condemned the U.S. missile
strike.
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov
spoke in Uzbekistan.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign
Minister (through
translator): Of course this is
an act of aggression,
committed on an absolutely
made-up pretext.
I hope these provocations will
not lead to
some kind of irreversible
consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Russian
Defense Ministry
announced that the U.S. attack
caused only
minimal damage to the Syrian air
base, and
that most of the cruise missiles
fell short.
Indeed, opposition activists
reported seeing
Syrian jets take off from the
base today,
heading for rebel-held areas.
But White House Press Secretary
Sean Spicer
said all 59 missiles hit their
targets, from
fighter jets to radar sites.
Meanwhile, Western allies backed
the U.S.
move.
In a statement, NATO
Secretary-General Jens
Stoltenberg said: "The Syrian
regime bears
the full responsibility for this
development."
German Chancellor Angela Merkel
also defended
the U.S. action, but urged
caution.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): The attack of the
United States
is understandable, given the
dimension of
the war crimes.
At the same time, and I
underline, more and
more, it remains important and
right to focus
all the attention on political
talks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Turkey's
President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan said the missile strike
was fully
warranted, but may not be
enough.
And Syrian rebel groups also
called for even
stronger action against the
Assad regime.
Again, Saleh Hawa:
SALEH HAWA: Right now, things
are different.
I think, from now on, Russian
and Bashar al-Assad
and Iran and all those, you
know, naughty
countries around the world will
understand
that, look, this is America.
America today is different from
before.
America is now ready to act.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The strike was in
stark contrast
to President Obama's policy.
He had warned of a red line
against the use
of chemical weapons, but backed
away from
military action after a chemical
attack in
August 2013 killed more than
1,000 Syrians.
During the campaign, Mr. Trump
also advocated
against military intervention in
Syria.
This week, he said the chemical
attack changed
his view of the Syrian war and
of Assad.
Mr. Trump had nothing to further
add today,
but at a U.N. Security Council
meeting, U.S.
Ambassador Nikki Haley didn't
rule out further
action.
NIKKI HALEY, U.S. Ambassador to
the United
Nations: The United States took
a very measured
step last night.
We are prepared to do more, but
we hope that
will not be necessary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the diplomatic
front, the
issue is likely to top the
agenda, as Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson visits
Moscow next
Wednesday.
In Congress, Democrats urged the
president
to seek congressional approval
for future
moves, while Republicans
generally applauded
his action.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: This
was a response
that was required in response to
the commission
of war crimes.
I want to emphasize, this is the
beginning,
not the end.
But the signal that was sent
around the world
is very important.
SEN.
EDWARD MARKEY (D),
Massachusetts: The president
has made a 180-degree pivot in
one week on
what the United States' role
should be in
Syria.
And I think that, as a result,
the United
States Congress should be fully
involved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will get a
deeper assessment
of the U.S. strike, and its
implications,
right after the news summary.
In the day's other news: The
long fight to
fill the vacancy on the U.S.
Supreme Court
is over.
The U.S. Senate today confirmed
President
Trump's nominee, Neil Gorsuch,
by a vote of
54-45.
He will fill the seat of the
late Justice
Antonin Scalia.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
The nomination of Neil M.
Gorsuch of Colorado
to be an associate justice of
the Supreme
Court of the United States is
confirmed.
LISA DESJARDINS: The final vote
was almost
anticlimactic, after Republicans
triggering
the so-called nuclear option on
Thursday.
That change in Senate procedure
meant a simple
majority could break the
Democratic filibuster
against Gorsuch.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell:
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: Of
course, I wish that important
aspects of this
process had played out
differently.
It didn't have to be this way.
But today is a new day.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the end,
three Democrats,
Joe Manchin, Heidi Heitkamp, and
Joe Donnelly,
joined Republicans in supporting
Gorsuch.
But most Democrats, like Dick
Durbin, lamented
how it came to be.
SEN.
RICHARD DURBIN (D-IL), Minority
Whip: When
the rule was changed, some
senators were engaged
in high-fives on the other side
of aisle.
I'm not sure why.
I don't think it was a time for
any winning
celebration.
I think it was an unfortunate
moment, and
the question is, where will we
go from here?
LISA DESJARDINS: Not all
Republicans were
celebrating the rule revision.
Arizona's John McCain:
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN: I am very concerned
about the
future, which will then, with
only 51-vote
majority required, will lead to
polarization
of the nominees as far as their
philosophies
are concerned.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Minority
Leader Chuck
Schumer promised to protect the
60-vote threshold
for ending filibusters on
legislation.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: I hope
the Republican leader and I can,
in the coming
months, find a way to build a
firewall around
the legislative filibuster,
which is the most
important distinction between
the Senate and
the House.
LISA DESJARDINS: On that at
least, Schumer
and McConnell agreed.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL: This notion
that this somehow
bleeds over into the legislative
filibuster
is untrue.
I'm opposed to it.
LISA DESJARDINS: As for Judge
Gorsuch, his
swearing-in as the 101st
associate justice
of the U.S. Supreme Court is set
for Monday.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
wound up his
Florida summit with Chinese
President Xi Jinping
today.
Both men spoke highly of their
first-ever
meeting, despite tensions over
trade and North
Korea.
Chinese reports said Mr. Trump
will visit
China later this year.
We will have the full story
later in the program.
In Sweden, at least four people
were killed
today when a hijacked beer truck
crashed into
a department store in Stockholm.
Fifteen others were hurt.
Witnesses said the truck plowed
into a crowd
of people before smashing into
the store.
The Swedish prime minister
called it an act
of terror.
It was the latest such incident
across Europe.
Police said they are looking for
the truck
driver.
More than 50,000 people marched
in cities
across South Africa today to
protest government
corruption.
They carried signs and shouted
slogans demanding
the removal of President Jacob
Zuma, after
he fired the country's
anti-corruption finance
minister.
WOMAN: I am marching because I
have a 4-year-old
daughter, and I feel if I don't
do something
about the future of the country,
nobody is
going to anything.
WOMAN: I'm here to fight, to
show my support
for this country, for the beauty
and the future
that this country has, instead
of the uprising
of one greedy, corrupt man.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The ailing Nobel
peace laureate
Desmond Tutu, now 85, also made
a rare public
appearance in support of the
demonstrations.
His foundation tweeted on his
behalf, "We
will pray for the downfall of a
government
that misrepresents us."
Back in this country, a federal
judge approved
the agreement between Baltimore
and the U.S.
Department of Justice on
reforming that city's
police department.
The judge said -- quote -- "It
is in the public
interest to approve it," despite
the Justice
Department request for a delay.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions
said he still
has grave concerns about the
agreement, and
that it may hinder the fight
against crime.
The long-running drought in
California is
finally over.
Governor Jerry Brown today
lifted emergency
conservation for nearly all of
the state.
He acted after a series of major
winter storms
brought heavy snow and rain.
U.S. job growth dropped sharply
in March,
to its worst showing in nearly a
year.
The Labor Department reported
that today in
its monthly summary.
It said U.S. employers added a
net of 98,000
jobs, despite the fact that
economists expected
nearly twice that many.
The unemployment rate fell to
4.5 percent,
which is the lowest in almost a
decade.
That jobs report, and the
tensions over Syria,
dampened the mood on Wall
Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost about
seven points to close at 20656.
The Nasdaq fell one point, and
the S&P 500
slipped two.
For the week, all three indexes
were down
a fraction of 1 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the road
ahead following the U.S. strikes
on Syria;
President Trump and Xi lay the
groundwork
for future negotiations; Mark
Shields and
David Brooks weigh in on Syria;
the Supreme
Court battle; and much more.
David Brooks weigh in on Syria;
the Supreme
Court battle; and much more.
We return now to our top story,
the U.S. attack
on a Syrian airfield.
Late today, administration
officials said
they'd seek new sanctions
against the regime
of Bashar al-Assad.
For more on the airstrikes and
their effects,
I'm joined by retired General
John Allen.
He was the top commander in
Afghanistan from
2011 to 2013, and, in 2014, he
became the
special presidential envoy for
the Global
Coalition Against ISIS.
Sarah Sewall served as
undersecretary of state
for civilian security, democracy
and human
rights during the Obama
administration.
She's now at Johns Hopkins
University.
And Retired Army Colonel Andrew
Bacevich,
professor emeritus of
international relations
and history at Boston
University.
And we welcome all three of you
to the program.
General Allen, I'm going to
start with you.
Was this a smart move by
President Trump,
his administration?
GEN.
JOHN ALLEN (RET.), Former
International Coalition
Coordinator: Judy, I think it
was.
I think it was warranted.
The crime of attacking innocent
civilians
with a nerve agent puts the
Assad regime in
a position where this kind of an
action is
absolutely justified.
I have been calling for this
kind of an action
for a long time, and I believe
it was justified.
And it wasn't just a message to
Bashar al-Assad.
It's a message to his Russian
patrons that
the United States is just not
going to tolerate
this kind of action from him any
longer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Colonel Bacevich,
your view?
Was this the right thing?
COL.
ANDREW J. BACEVICH (RET.),
Boston University:
Well, what is the thing?
What is the action?
If indeed, as some people
suggest, this is
a one-off event, then my guess
is, a week
from now, we won't even be
talking abut it,
and it will quickly be
forgotten.
If, as some people suggest, this
shows a more
assertive Trump administration,
that somehow
we're going to ratchet up the
pressure on
the Assad regime, trying to
produce regime
change, then I would be very
much interested
in hearing more about how that
is going to
occur and, beyond that, if and
when it occurs,
if Assad is forced out, then
what?
What do we think the United
States will inherit,
and what will the United States
do with that
inheritance?
Recalling the situation after
regime change
in Iraq and Libya, you know,
those seem to
be the reasonable questions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sarah Sewall, how
do you gauge
what happened?
SARAH SEWALL, Former State
Department Official:
Well, it's very difficult to
know right now,
Judy.
We don't know whether this will
fall into
the category of a symbolic,
pinprick strike
that had no marginal -- had no
meaningful
effect, or whether this could be
the beginning
of something that gets us much
more deeply
embroiled, whether it's similar
to the no-fly
zones that we created in
Southern and Northern
Iraq after the first Desert
Storm war, or
whether it's like the Kosovo
campaign that
was designed to produce a
negotiated solution
that we thought would take days,
and instead
took weeks, or whether it could
be like the
Libya intervention, where we
were nominally
protecting citizens, but we
ended up creating
a much more difficult terrorist
threat throughout
the region.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, General
Allen, it is the
case that we don't know yet how
effective
this is, do we?
We're waiting to find out.
GEN.
JOHN ALLEN: Well, I would say a
couple of
things, Judy, to the other
points that have
been made.
The administration is going to
have to give
us a sense of what their policy
is.
This is obviously a change from
the previous
administration.
And military action without
political context
is often just ineffectual,
there's no purpose
for it.
And it's a dangerous road to get
on, as the
other commentators have
indicated.
So, it would be very helpful for
us to understand
what policy changes have created
this strategy
within which military action
like this can
occur.
But I think it's been an
important event,
because it's not just a very
important signal
to Bashar al-Assad and to
President Putin.
There are others around the
world who should
have taken very significant
attention or made
significant points of paying
attention to
this strike, Kim Jong-un, for
example.
And the president just
completed, by all accounts,
a successful summit with
President Xi Jinping
of China, and we don't -- we
find ourselves
in an environment where there's
a similar
relationship there, where there
is a patron
and there is a client.
And I know it has not escaped
the attention
of President Xi that the nuclear
saber-rattling
of Kim Jong-un has attracted the
attention
of President Trump.
And so, having held Bashar
al-Assad accountable
for this, we need to pay
attention to Northeast
Asia about a more activist
United States in
this regard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Colonel Bacevich,
what about
that?
I mean, this does send a signal
to the rest
of the world that this president
is prepared
to act.
COL.
ANDREW J. BACEVICH: Well, I
think it's important
to reflect on how this decision
came to be
made, at least how we understand
that it came
to be made.
A week ago, the president was
largely indifferent
to events in Syria.
It appears that, when he saw the
videotapes
of the aftermath of the Syrian
chemical weapons
attack, he was outraged, and
then basically,
in about a 48-hour period, he
went from being
indifferent to deciding we had
to attack Syria.
And I have to say that strikes
me as not so
much a change in policy, but
really a change
in impulses.
We have an impulsive president.
We see little in our president
that suggests
that he acts after serious
reflection.
And so, yes, indeed, if somebody
like Kim
Jong-un in North Korea is
reflecting on the
implications of the Syrian
attack, are the
implications one that would
cause Kim Jong-un
to be more prudent, or does he
say, holy cow,
holy cow, we got a crazy guy on
the other
end of this relationship?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sarah Sewall, how
much does
it matter whether there was a
thought-through
policy that went into that?
(CROSSTALK)
SARAH SEWALL: It matters
enormously.
It really does, Judy, because if
they don't
know what their endgame is, if
know what their goals are, then
they don't
know what their next steps are.
I mean, let's look at the
situation from a
couple of different angles.
First of all, if all we're doing
is a red
line on chemical weapons, that's
not immaterial,
but it's really not the point.
The point is that Assad is a
butcher.
And so the question becomes for
the civilians,
do I care if I'm being gassed or
I'm being
hit by barrel bombs?
The problem is still there.
Second, look at the Russian
issue.
Now we have got a much more
commingled battlefield
with higher risk of actual
escalation.
Do we really want that?
Is that a smart move?
What happens if something does
escalate?
Third, look at the order of
battle on the
ground.
We talk about whether or not you
can use force
to get a political settlement.
Who are the biggest, most
powerful actors
among the rebels?
They're al-Qaida and ISIS.
So, even if we're willing to
commit to try
to use enough force to get a
negotiated settlement,
we're actually at risk of
strengthening the
hand of the rebels that we have
nominally
vowed to fight in the war on
terror.
JUDY WOODRUFF: General John
Allen, this sounds
-- what Sarah is saying sounds
like a lot
of the arguments that we --
President Obama
perhaps used in the decision not
to go in
and attack after that chemical
incident in
2013.
GEN.
JOHN ALLEN: Well, Sarah is
right.
And it's good to see Sarah
again.
She was terrific at State while
she was there.
Look, the environment was very
different in
2013.
I think we'd be in a very
different world
today if we had struck them.
The Russians weren't on the
ground.
The moderate Syrian opposition
could have
made significant -- could have
had significant
value out of that strike.
It would have changed Bashar
al-Assad's calculus
with respect to what he could
do, and it would
have set, I think, the
conditions for a more
fruitful discussion about the
political transition
that would have removed him from
power.
And the Obama administration and
the Trump
administration, I believe, are
not intent,
ultimately, on regime collapse,
but simply
the removal of Bashar al-Assad
and remaining
and having much of that regime
remain intact,
which could, in fact, continue
to govern in
some manner.
What we have got to be very
careful about
is looking for all the reasons
why the United
States shouldn't act.
And there are plenty.
We have heard them tonight.
But, at some point, the United
States, I believe,
has a moral obligation to act.
And selling short the decision
to make this
attack, I think, in some
respects, doesn't
take into account some very,
very serious
strategic minds that are at work
right now.
We have a secretary of defense,
we have a
chairman of the Joint Chiefs,
and we have
a national security adviser and
a secretary
of state who are very serious
thinkers and
strategic leaders.
And I think that they are
advising the president
about this strike, but I think
there's much
more behind this in the context
of a strategy
that emerges ultimately from a
policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well...
GEN.
JOHN ALLEN: And I think we need
to take a
moment and look for that
articulation by the
White House of what our policy
is going to
be and what that strategy will
be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as we wait
for that, Andrew
Bacevich, what do you see as the
next step
here, whether this was the right
or the wrong
move?
What happens now?
COL.
ANDREW J. BACEVICH: Well, I
think the point's
been well made.
We have not heard anything that
remotely resembles
a strategy from this president
or from this
administration.
We now have the president's
response to the
first crisis that he has faced.
And the response is one to opt
for military
force, which, of course, has
become exceedingly
routine in the way we approach
the world.
But this conversation, I think,
reveals the
difficulty.
We don't know what is the
context in which
this decision was made.
And I think we desperately need
to hear that
context, to hear some vision, to
get a sense
of strategy.
I'm not particularly encouraged
by the fact
that three out of the four
people that General
Allen just ticked off are
generals.
It strikes me that that is
suggestive of a
mind-set that is likely to opt
for force as
the preferred response to almost
any situation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sarah Sewall, I'm
going to
ask you to comment on that, if
you want to,
but also to share with us, what
do you think
happens next?
I mean, do we just wait and see
whether Assad
attacks again with chemical
weapons?
We know that there was a report
today that
jets -- his jets took off and
attacked a rebel
base in Homs today.
SARAH SEWALL: Here's my concern,
Judy, that,
in the absence of a clear world
view and an
articulated strategy, it's very
easy for individual
uses of force and for
high-minded rhetoric
to begin to just escalate within
its own echo
chamber.
And so I think it's really hard
to predict
where we're going to go from
here.
It's not comforting to me that
this feels
reflexive and improvisational,
rather than
really thought out and
strategic.
Since I don't know what the goal
is, I don't
know where we're likely to go
next.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In just a few
seconds, what
about Colonel Bacevich's point
that this is
mostly generals advising the
president, retired
generals?
SARAH SEWALL: I do think that,
as a matter
of foreign policy, it is
essential that civilian
leadership and diplomats balance
the advice
from military officials.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in five
seconds, General
Allen, on that point?
GEN.
JOHN ALLEN: Yes.
I got to -- I got something to
say on this.
Generals know an awful lot about
fighting.
They also know a lot about the
consequences
of war.
And I know these generals.
And they're going to give the
president their
best advice.
And they understand American
power.
And if we chose to use military
force, it
wasn't because former generals
forced the
president into that option.
These are great strategic
thinkers who understand
all about American power.
And they fully understand the
consequences
of the use of military force.
So, I would be careful about
assuming, because
they are former generals, that
they immediately
went to a reflex to use military
force.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're going to
have to leave
it there.
General John Allen, Colonel
Andrew Bacevich,
Sarah Sewall, we thank you.
GEN.
JOHN ALLEN: Thanks, Judy.
COL.
ANDREW J. BACEVICH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: These American
strikes in Syria
came as President Trump, as we
have reported,
was hosting the president of
China for their
first summit -- the chief
issues, North Korea's
nuclear and missile programs and
trade between
the world's top two economies.
John Yang has a report.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
The relationship developed by
President Xi
and myself, I think, is
outstanding.
JOHN YANG: After his first
encounter with
the man leading the nation he
once criticized
as a menace, President Trump was
full of praise.
DONALD TRUMP: President Xi and
all of his
representatives have been really
interesting
to be with.
I think we have made tremendous
progress in
our relationship with China.
JOHN YANG: White House officials
said the
goal of the seaside summit was
to establish
a basis for future relations.
XI JINPING, Chinese President
(through translator):
This bilateral meeting is a
thoughtful and
ingenious arrangement.
It is an important and
meaningful development
in the U.S.-China relationship.
I believe that, with the passage
of time,
we will make efforts to create
prosperity
for both countries and their
people and to
uphold global peace and
stability.
JOHN YANG: The plush setting of
Mr. Trump's
Mar-a-Lago resort didn't mask
the urgency
of their discussions, especially
the U.S.
hope that China will exert more
economic pressure
on North Korea to halt its
nuclear and missile
testing programs.
Pyongyang test-fired yet another
missile this
week.
Mr. Trump told The Financial
Times: "If China
is not going to solve North
Korea, we will."
That message may have been
underscored by
the U.S. missile attack on Syria
that took
place as the two leaders had
dinner.
MAX BAUCUS (D), Former U.S.
Senator: I suspect,
frankly, that one of the reasons
the president
decided to strike Syria was to
try to put
President Xi and the Chinese a
little off-balance.
JOHN YANG: Former U.S. Envoy to
China Max
Baucus says the moment of truth
on North Korea
is drawing near.
MAX BAUCUS: That's going to put
pressure on
Xi to try to find a solution
himself.
They haven't done a lot so far
because they'd
rather have stability on the
peninsula than
try to get him to stop doing
what he's doing.
We, as Americans, I think have
no choice but
to try to find a solution with
China.
We cannot do this unilaterally.
JOHN YANG: Trade is another
flash point between
the world's two largest
economies.
China accounted for almost 70
percent of last
year's $500 billion U.S. trade
deficit.
During the campaign,
denunciations of China
were a constant refrain in Mr.
Trump's stump
speeches.
DONALD TRUMP: Don't forget,
we're the piggy
bank.
We have rebuilt China.
They have taken so much money
out of our country.
We can't continue to allow China
to rape our
country.
And that's what they're doing.
JOHN YANG: Last week, the
president signed
a pair of executive orders aimed
at combating
foreign trade abuses, but he has
yet to carry
out his campaign promise to
formally label
China a currency manipulator.
In a February interview with
Reuters, he said:
"I think they're grand champions
at manipulation
of currency.
So I haven't held back.
We will see what happens."
Democrats say the president's
all talk and
no action.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: One
of the few hopes we had with
President Trump
is that he'd finally stand up to
China, but,
up to now, when it comes to
China, he looks
like a 98-pound weakling.
JOHN YANG: Former Ambassador
Baucus.
How tough can the United States
be on China
on trade?
MAX BAUCUS: You have to stand up
to them.
And my view is, we should stand
up to them
more than we have, precisely,
targeted, not
big blunderbuss, you know, a
huge, big tariff
and all that, but, rather,
selected industries
and sectors.
JOHN YANG: Today, Mr. Trump said
he's looking
forward to frequent meetings
with President
Xi.
DONALD TRUMP: We look forward to
being together
many times in the future, and I
believe lots
of very potentially bad problems
will be going
away.
JOHN YANG: U.S. officials say
Mr. Trump has
accepted an invitation to visit
China in the
future.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
ahead of Passover,
an exploration of Jewish cooking
from around
the world; and a Syrian-American
ponders what
separates her from today's
refugees.
But, first, to the analysis of
Shields and
Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks, who
joins us from New York.
And welcome, gentlemen.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mark, let's
start out by
talking about the attack
launched against
Syria.
Was this -- what do you make of
it?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, first of
all, the previous
discussion is well worth
listening to again
and again.
Each of them was -- made, I
thought, incredibly
perceptive points.
The thing that amazes me is the
president's
transformation is kind of, what
moves this
president?
This president, who had his
United Nations
ambassador, Nikki Haley, as
recently as last
week say that this was no longer
a priority,
removing -- we're living with
Bashar al-Assad
in Syria, and to have the
secretary of state
say it's up to the people of
Syria.
Is that the five million
refugees to vote
absentee, to vote to remove him
from office?
But -- and he's unmoved, Judy --
he's been
unmoved by the unforgettable
image of Omran
Daqneesh, the little 5-year-old
boy who was
covered with dust and blood and
debris after
an Aleppo bombing by the
Russians that killed
his 10-year-old brother.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Years of killing.
MARK SHIELDS: And unmoved by the
3-year-old
Alan Kurdi on the beach drowned
as a refugee.
But he obviously was moved by
this, or appeared
to be.
It seemed to be an epiphany of
sorts.
But I think Colonel Bacevich
asked the penetrating
question.
And that is, what's next?
Is this just an impulse?
Is this just a reaction, an
altogether legitimate
reaction?
But is it part of a strategy?
Because military action, absent
strategy,
we have seen it, we have paid
for it, the
world has paid for it, and human
beings have
paid the ultimate sacrifice for
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is your take
on the Syria
strike, David?
DAVID BROOKS: The question
what's next strikes
me as a secondary question.
The primary question is, what
are we going
to do about chemical warfare?
A hundred years ago, right now,
World War
I was going on, and there people
were being
gassed in the trenches.
And the fact that the world
community has
basically tried to eliminate
chemical weapons
since that time strikes me as a
great achievement.
And to go back on that would be
a great step
backward for civilization.
And Barack Obama, unfortunately,
didn't do
anything when chemical weapons
were used.
So, I think it was incumbent
upon the U.S.
to do something when chemical
weapons were
used.
Does this signal some grand
change of strategy
in the Middle East?
I sort of doubt it.
But at least we set this
precedent on this
particular issue.
Now, question, I think it was
probably totally
impulsive of President Trump to
do this.
He's an impulsive person.
And we're stuck the downsides of
his impulsivity.
But there are upsides to having
an impulsive
president, because nobody in the
world, especially
in places like North Korea,
quite knows what's
going to happen.
And so, frankly, there are some
advantages
to that.
MARK SHIELDS: I could not
disagree more.
We had an impulsive president in
George W.
Bush.
The last time the Congress of
the United States,
15 years ago, recognized and
accepted its
constitutional responsibility,
its sole authority
to take the United States into
war, their
capacity to declare war, the
power to declare
war and send Americans, they did
it on the
eve of the election of 2002,
when it was to
their political advantage, and
not once since,
despite the best efforts of
Republican Senator
Jeff Flake of Arizona, and Tim
Kaine of Virginia
to step up to that
responsibility.
We can't -- I'm sorry.
We don't celebrate impulse.
And that he keeps other people
off-balance
is not a strategy.
It's not a rational process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it's not my
preferred
strategy.
I would rather have a strategy,
obviously.
But I am just pointing out there
is some upside
to having somebody who's a
little unpredictable.
To me, one of the questions is,
does this
lead to a more normal Trump
administration,
a more normal Republican foreign
policy administration,
where you have the U.S. saying,
yes, we're
going to guarantee some sort of
world order?
Donald Trump so far has been so
far away from
that, any step in that direction
would be
welcome.
And we see in the White House
over the last
week is the rise of General
Mattis, the rise
of National Security Adviser
McMaster, maybe
the rise, a little influence of
Rex Tillerson,
and possibly the banishment of
Steve Bannon.
And if that's happening, then we
are heading
toward a more normal Republican
administration.
I think it's too early to say
that's happening.
I still think we have a
president who is not
strategically minded, doesn't
have a long
attention span, and does react.
But, in this particular case --
and I suspect
it was a one-off case that, as
Andy Bacevich
said, we will have forgotten in
a week, but
I think it was the right one-off
thing to
do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Mark?
There have been changes in the
White House,
including Steve Bannon coming
off the National
Security Council.
And we're reading that Bannon's
cache may
be dropping, as the president's
son-in-law,
Jared Kushner, and Gary Cohn,
who runs the
Economic Council, that their
stock rises.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, Judy, just
one point that
David made I agree completely
with him.
The military, the defense --
General Mattis
certainly has -- you can see his
influence.
And let's be very blunt about
it.
The only people in this Cabinet
who know what
they're doing, who have any
experience are
the military people.
They're the ones that
understand.
And it's understandable that
General Mattis
rejected and resisted and fought
against the
policy of Barack Obama,
President Obama.
He did push for more military.
So, he is filling this void.
And I think that that is a --
that's a plus
for the country.
As far as what's going on in the
White House,
I can't believe this disarray in
the White
House or these tensions, because
the president
told us it had been the most
successful 13
weeks of any president in U.S.
history.
And it seems a funny way to
celebrate that.
But it's a pretty good rule of
thumb, Judy.
Steve Bannon is the only person
that has had
a worse week than Bill O'Reilly.
And it's a pretty good rule of
thumb that,
when you start talking personnel
changes in
any administration, whether it's
Jimmy Carter
in 1979 firing Joe Califano, or
Jerry Ford
cashiering Nelson Rockefeller in
1975, George
H.W. Bush getting rid of John
Sununu as chief
of staff, it's a pretty good
indication you're
in political trouble.
All three lost.
I would point that out.
And I think that's going on
right now.
I don't know -- Steve Bannon
made an incredibly
dumb move.
And that is, you don't put the
boss in the
position of trying to -- being
forced to choose
between your daughter, your
favorite child's
spouse, Jared Kushner, and him.
And it looks like that's what
Bannon has done,
and he's coming up short.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
David?
What's going on?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, from what we can tell,
there are two
things going on.
One, they have had a series of
failures.
And I hope they recognize them
as failures,
the health care failures, the
budget failures,
a series of other things.
And, second, the poisonous
atmosphere within
the administration.
If you talk to people who are
working with
the administration from outside
or those within,
they all describe a
scorpions-in-the-bottle-type
atmosphere.
And that's something the
president has engineered
himself by deciding who's going
to be with
him one second, who's not going
him one second, who he favors
one second,
who he disfavors another second.
And so he has set an atmosphere
primarily
concerned to tear his staff
apart.
And he's hired people who are
apt at that.
And so the atmosphere is
extremely unhappy.
And so those -- both those
things are happening,
which, in a normal
administration, would recommend
a change.
It is still -- it should be
said, still in
the realm of rumor.
But the acidity of life in the
White House,
that seems to be pretty
well-established.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Acidity?
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Acidity.
Acidity is good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As David said.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
Every White House, Judy, is
ultimately and
inevitably a mirror reflection
of the person
at the top.
I mean, the self-righteousness
of Jimmy Carter's,
the insular -- the paranoia of
Richard Nixon's,
the detachment of Barack
Obama's, it all reflects
the person at the top.
The chaos and the civil war in
the leper colony
going on now reflects Donald
Trump's style
and preferred modus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm sure none
of these
presidents take what you said
personally.
MARK SHIELDS: No.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, David, we do
have now a
new Supreme Court justice to
fill the Antonin
Scalia slot.
But, in the meantime, what we
have seen is
the Republican leadership in the
Senate change
the rules in order to get Neil
Gorsuch over
the line.
There is some -- there is a lot
of talk right
now about, what does that mean
for the future?
We already have a very polarized
country,
House of Representatives.
The feeling was, the Senate
maybe wasn't quite
so polarized.
What does this mean going
forward, that they
now are going to make it so much
easier for
-- it appears, for nominees from
the far left
or the far right to be
confirmed?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, it's the 967th nail in the
coffin of
bipartisanship.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: And so it's the
end of a long
process.
It may be the end.
Maybe things will get even
worse.
Now, Democrats took a big step
in lower judges.
We can go back to the Bork
hearings.
We can go back to a million
different hearings.
But the Senate has become
gradually to look
more like the House.
And so I think it's a sad day.
It's a pretty inevitable day.
I think, if the Democrats had
won this election,
they would have done exactly the
same thing
if they were in the similar
circumstance.
The precedent was set.
And I think the sad part going
forward is,
it used to be, if you were
president, you
had some incentive to try to
nominate a judge
who could maybe get 60 votes,
who could appeal
to some people in the other
party.
Now you have zero incentive as
long as you
can control the Senate.
And so we will see more -- even
more partisan
judges than we do now.
The only thing I would say to
mitigate, which
I think is a decline and a
degradation and
a sadness, is that I have a
feeling that something
is about to happen with the
Trump administration.
Either it will shift, or
something bad will
happen, a scandal or something,
and that we're
in sort of a pre-apocalypse
phase, or maybe
that's putting it strongly.
But history is about to change,
because I
don't think the status quo can
maintain.
And so if we have something, an
administration
that really suffers some
grievous blow, then
the Washington culture will have
an opportunity
to change for the better.
But, as of now, it's a long,
slow slide.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do I hear you
forecasting an
apocalypse of some sort?
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Well, that word
came out.
I should have stuck with
acidity.
That was a better word.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But I do think
Washington -- it
doesn't feel like this
administration can
maintain the current state.
Something is going to happen,
and then we
will be in a different world,
with the possibility
of bipartisanship.
And some senators, like Senator
Collins and
Coons and others, are still
hungering for
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you see
coming out
of the Senate?
MARK SHIELDS: John McCain is
fond of quoting
Chairman Mao.
And David brings that to mind,
which is, it's
always darkest just before
everything goes
black.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And that is what
strikes me.
I join him, I join David in
commending Susan
Collins of Maine, the
Republican, and Chris
Coons of Delaware, the Democrat,
for trying
to keep alive a sense of comity
and -- I-T-Y
-- and rapprochement and
bipartisanship.
They're sponsoring a resolution
that 61, or
at least a letter that 61
senators have signed
that they will not have the
nuclear option
on just legislative -- domestic
legislation,
and that that would keep at
least some hope
alive that there would be a
chance of moving
across the aisle, working across
the aisle.
I think one of the saddest
moments for me
of the year 2016, Judy, was when
John McCain,
who had been the apostle of
bipartisanship,
announced before the election
that he wouldn't
vote for any Supreme Court
nominee whom Hillary
Clinton -- President Hillary
Clinton nominated.
And that's contagious.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Slings and arrows
coming from
both sides.
We wish you both a wonderful
weekend.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields and
David Brooks,
thank you.
Now, as we approach the Jewish
holiday of
Passover, we have a new addition
to the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
It's a celebration of cooking
and tradition.
JOAN NATHAN, Chef: When I
started the book,
I decided I really wanted to go
to India,
because I knew there was a
Jewish community
there.
And when I got to the synagogue
in Cochin,
it said that Jews had been
coming from the
time of King Solomon.
And I thought, wow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with that,
celebrated food
authority Joan Nathan started
her 11th cookbook,
"King Solomon's Table: A
Culinary Exploration
of Jewish Cooking From Around
the World,"
with recipes handed down from
generation to
generation.
What you have done in this book
is, you take
us to different parts of the
world.
And then you show us these
incredible dishes.
How in the world did you pull
all this together?
JOAN NATHAN: I went to a lot of
places in
the world, but I could find
these immigrants
from Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan
in Brooklyn,
or Iranian Jews in L.A.
And then I found pockets like in
El Salvador,
in Cuba.
I found people that told me
about stories
that I had never heard before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How did you
decide which foods
to choose?
JOAN NATHAN: You know what?
I find a really wonderful dish.
Then I go with it.
For example, I went to an
Ethiopian Jewish
dinner in California.
It was in San Diego.
And I went to a Shabbat dinner.
So they had this dabos, which is
an Ethiopian
Shabbat bread, adapted, of
course, from an
Ethiopian bread.
It was so delicious, I thought,
I have got
to put that in the book.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the other
thing that we're
standing in front of is this
flourless chocolate
cake, which came out of someone
who came from
Egypt.
JOAN NATHAN: From Egypt.
And, you know, flourless
chocolate cake is
part of our seder every year.
You can't have wheat, or flour
in -- unless
its specially watched flour, in
your desserts.
And I always liked having a
flourless chocolate
cake.
And I thought maybe you would
help me decorate
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good.
I'm going to do a little of this
while you're
talking.
JOAN NATHAN: That's right.
That looks beautiful.
I have been very lucky through
the years that
people have opened up to me all
over the world.
And like, for example, I wanted
to get Iraqi
recipes, but I couldn't go to
Iraq.
But I was told that the best
Iraqi cooks live
in London.
So, I went to London, and I got
a wonderful
Passover macaroon.
And then somebody told me about
a recipe called
shritzla (ph).
And it was a blueberry bun that
people in
Toronto ate.
And I learned that it came from
Southwest
Poland.
And the woman that made it, if
she hadn't
come over very early, my guess
is that that
recipe would have been lost.
In Southwest Poland, the
religious Jews, when
the Nazis came in, they just
took them out.
So, this recipe, I saved a
recipe for other
people, because most people we
killed.
I mean, these are stories that
are quite amazing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you have kept
them alive.
JOAN NATHAN: Well, I have tried
to keep them
alive.
And I have often thought, what's
the difference
between Jewish cooking and other
cooking?
You know, this could be any
immigrant food
in many ways.
But it's Jewish immigrants for,
I think, three
reasons.
One is because of the dietary
laws.
You know, you can't mix milk and
meat.
You can't eat certain shellfish,
so that what
happens is, Jewish people think
about their
food a lot.
And they like to eat.
They're obsessed about it.
And most food is connected to a
holiday.
So, that's one point.
The second is that Jews have
always been merchants,
since the time of King Solomon,
going out
looking for the new.
And the third is that Jews have
been expelled
from so many places, like so
many people today.
And they keep -- wherever you
go, you have
to adapt to new food.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And they have
kept their traditions
as they have moved.
JOAN NATHAN: Yes, exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's look
at one of
those traditions now.
JOAN NATHAN: OK.
Let's go into my dining room.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Joan, now we
are at a table
set for seder.
JOAN NATHAN: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which, of course,
is all around
the Jewish observance of the
Passover.
This is one of those traditions
where food
is of enormous importance.
JOAN NATHAN: Right.
This is the seder plate.
And the first thing is the
shankbone.
And this is symbolic of the
destruction of
the First and Second Temple, as
is the egg,
which is also symbolic of
rebirth and general
sorrow.
Parsley is the spring, but you
dip it in saltwater
to remember your enemies, even
when you have
conquered them, because they
have suffered.
The other two are the matzah and
the bitter
herbs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This story, it
goes back to
Abraham.
JOAN NATHAN: It goes back to
But these three symbols, the
bitter herbs,
lamb, and the matzah, were
mentioned in the
Bible.
Those were -- the only thing
that was necessary.
And it wasn't until after the
destruction
of the Second Temple that
Passover became
a home festival around a table,
because there
was no longer a temple in
Jerusalem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have made
some sweet jam.
JOAN NATHAN: Right, this is a
sweet blend.
This is symbolic of the mortar
when the Jews
were slaves in Egypt.
So, it's all slavery to freedom.
And the original one was a date
jam.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is this.
JOAN NATHAN: The biblical honey.
And that was the one in Babylon.
Then there is -- this one
actually is from
Maine, blueberries, very modern.
This one is from Persia or Iran.
And it has nuts.
It's got pistachios.
It has pears.
It's got dates, all kinds of
good things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Judaism, food
is an integral
part of telling the story.
JOAN NATHAN: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why is it so
important to remember
these stories and to remember, I
mean, down
to the recipes that you have
preserved in
this book?
JOAN NATHAN: Well, I think, in
the Bible,
it says you must relate this
story to your
children, so they know that
they're free men
and that they are Jews, and that
you don't
want to be in slavery, and you
don't want
to treat people like slaves.
It's just something that we must
preserve
throughout history.
It's the hardest meal for me to
prepare.
And it's the most wonderful, the
most meaningful,
because I do think that it's
important for
families today to take those
traditions from
their past and cling to them.
And I really get totally moved
when I think
about the seder, with Jews all
over the world
at the same time reading this
ancient text
and enjoying foods from all over
the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Joan Nathan, food
writer, extraordinary
cook, author now of your 11th
book, thank
you very much.
JOAN NATHAN: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can get
Joan Nathan's
recipe for flourless cake,
chocolate cake,
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
It's delicious.
Finally tonight: reflections on
coming to
the United States from author
Alia Malek,
who considers the various
journeys Syrian
refugees take on their many
roads from Damascus.
ALIA MALEK, Author: In September
2015, I felt
I had to drop everything and go
to Turkey
to report on Syrians as they
hurriedly made
their way to Europe, trying to
beat the rapidly
closing borders.
As a Syrian-American, their fate
was one I
had only accidentally been
spared.
As I accompanied them on this
journey, I couldn't
help thinking of how different
their circumstances
were from how my own Syrian
family had ended
up in the diaspora, of how my
mother, pregnant
with me, herself had left
Damascus.
Unlike the dangerous
Mediterranean Sea crossings
and the trek through the
Balkans, her trip
itself wasn't treacherous, and
it wasn't undignified.
She was traveling to Baltimore
to join my
father, a medical resident at
the University
of Maryland.
While emotionally painful, her
journey couldn't
have been easier.
She wasn't facing imminent death
or displacement,
as people are today.
In fact, both my parents meant
to eventually
return to their homeland.
But when it became clear what
life would be
like under the Assad regime,
they gave up
their dream to return.
Years after all their children
were born American,
they too finally became
naturalized Americans.
When my family arrived here in
the '70s, being
Syrian wasn't a barrier to
becoming American.
Even if Arabs weren't
well-perceived generally,
Syrians specifically didn't hold
much of a
place in the American
imagination or consciousness.
In fact, I remember the best a
schoolyard
bully could do was tell me that,
as a Syrian,
I ate too much cereal.
Oh, for those days.
In these past six years, as
Syria has disintegrated,
taken over the headlines, and as
Syrians have
become the foreign menace of the
day, I have
often thought about the vagaries
of fate,
of how accidental and unintended
occurrences
are what separate me from the
Syrians unfairly
maligned, banned, and banished
today, how
our lot depends on when we
decided to leave,
where we landed, and how we got
there, whether
we boarded flights with regular
tickets and
visas, or were piled on top of
each other
on flimsy rafts and left to
drift across the
sea unguided, how our future
depends on what
suffix happens to follow Syrian
on arrival.
Is it refugee?
Is it immigrant?
Is it American?
I'm lucky to be that last one.
A Syrian mother I was traveling
with across
Europe worried at each new
border, what would
happen to her children?
In Syria, they had been
comfortably working
class.
Her husband was a baker, and she
was a stay-at-home
mom.
At the beginning of the trip,
her children
were horrified to have to
relieve themselves
outdoors and in public.
Within days, though, she was
pained to see
how they had quickly adjusted to
their new
reality.
I instead approached each
crossing with a
guilty confidence of a
passport-carrying American.
I was completely aware that my
fortune was
in large part by chance and
circumstance.
But, rather than make me unique,
I imagine
that makes me like many other
Americans whose
families were also once upon the
time among
the lucky, favored by fate to
have made it
to these shores when and how we
did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's a
perspective we
need to hear, Alia Malek.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: As we
go into the weekend, we asked
for reading
suggestions from an independent
bookstore
in Lahore, Pakistan.
You can see their
recommendations on topics
from hip-hop to Persian cooking.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Later tonight on "Washington
Week": A reporters
roundtable further explores
President Trump's
decision to strike Syria.
What led to the dramatic shift
in his national
security priorities?
And what do the missile strikes
in Syria signal
to U.S. allies?
And join us tomorrow on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
We hear from a charity in Africa
that gives
cash to those in need, no
strings attached.
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
a story about the end of an era,
as the curtain
comes down for the last time on
the Ringling
Brothers Circus.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.